---
layout: post
title: Extra Credit Tutorial (PlantUML) 
---

# introduction: what is the tool for, what was it used for on your project
This blog post will be different from the posts I normally make. Normally I answer a few questions about my week and my experiences with the class, but this time I will provide a tutorial on plantUML. PlantUML is a language which enables people to easily create diagrams. I'm not an expert with this, however, since this was one of the tools I used to create the UML diagrams in the Software Engineering class, I thought a slight introduction would be helpful. My intention is to help people like me who need things to be in a simple and concise form to understand it. I'm only going to cover how to create class diagrams am not going to explain how to come up with a diagram from a given program. I'm assuming that you already know how to do that. My goal is to enable you to create a simple diagram using plantUML and offer you some links to help get more information.

# history: who created it, when was it created, where was it created
PlantUML was developed by Arnaud Roques and was initially released on April 17th, 2009. It is an open-source project which is currently available on GitHub at https://github.com/plantuml/plantuml. It is also still maintained. According to Wikipedia, the most recent release was two months ago, version 1.2018.4. I usually tend to believe Wikipedia, however, there seems to be a lot of activity on the GitHub account with a more recent version number created four days ago. This version, version 1.2018.9 is what is posted on the official website under downloads. There's an interview of Arnaud Roques available at https://modeling-languages.com/interview-plantuml/. I find it interesting that he created this language to solve the problem of "keeping the documentation up to date." He didn't like how he needed to use different tools and wanted to be able to create the diagrams directly from Microsoft Word. Just the fact that he was trying to use Microsoft Word is interesting because once I entered UTCS, I don't think I've heard of anyone using Microsoft Word. I certainly haven't needed to use it recently. 

# installation: step by step instructions on how to install it on different environments, especially on Docker
PlantUML does not need to be installed locally to be used. If you have internet access and a browser, you can easily edit the example on the home page and get a diagram. The link to the online server is http://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/uml/SyfFKj2rKt3CoKnELR1Io4ZDoSa70000. Once you get to this page, you are ready to go. An alternative is to go to the downloads page at http://plantuml.com/download and download it from the appropriate link. PlantUML is also available as plug-ins or extensions to many programs. While researching plantPML, I even saw a plug-in for my Chrome browser. I personally do not like the official website because it is easy to accidentally click on an advertisement. Here are the steps I took to start using plantUML. 
Step 1: Open my browser  
Step 2: Go to https://www.planttext.com/ 
I feel like this website is much friendlier to use and look at. On the left is a text editor to enter plantUML code and on the right is the generated UML diagram. There are also no annoying advertisements to accidentally click on because they look like they could be helpful. There is also an option to download the diagram. Having all this available on one simple and clear page appeals to me more than installing it. Any code written in the text editor can be copied and saved into another file to upload into gitLab or saved locally. The website also tends to remember your last edits, which was nice for this class because that was the only diagram I was working on and I always used the same computer. 

# use: step by step by instructions on how to use it
At planttext.com there are various samples for different types of diagrams which may be helpful to look at to get an idea of how to write the code. I thought the relationship diagram under classes was the most relevant to this project, but the others were also interesting to look at. To have a title accompany the diagram, all you have to do is write title then follow it with the name you want. You do not write any parenthesis, the code you write is what is inside the parentheses.  So, "title My Sample Title" will write "My Sample Title" centered above your diagram. To add classes to your diagram, all you need to do is type the word "class" followed by the name of the class. If you hit refresh (submit for the official online server), you can see the current diagram this code creates. If there are any methods or attributes you would like to add for the classes you can use follow the class name with curly braces ({}) and within these braces type a plus sign ("+") followed by the name for each attribute. It matters which line you do things, so this is how it is: 
Step 0: optionally write all the code between "@startuml" and "@endeml"
Step 1: add a title by writing the keyword "title" followed by what you want as a title 
Step 2: start at a new line and type "class" followed by the name of the class
Step 3: type "{" next to the class name
Step 4: go to the next line 
Step 5: type "+"
Step 6: write the name of the method or attribute for that class
step 7: go to the next line
step 8: type "}"
step 9: add relationships or labels between classes
If you have multiple methods or attributes, you can repeat steps 4-6 until you have added them all and repeat steps 2-8 for any additional classes. The last thing to consider about class diagrams is the relationship between classes. If there aren't any, you can skip this and the diagram is done. However, our models were supposed to be connected to each other, so there should be a relationship between the classes. To draw a line between two classes write the two class names and then put two dashes with spaces on both sides (" -- ") between them. So it will look like "class1 -- class2" on one line. You can also represent an extension, composition or aggregation between classes by typing "<|--", "*--", or "o--" between class names. It's also possible to add labels to the relationship by typing ":" followed by the desired label after the second class. To add labels about cardinality, put the desired text inside quotes ("") on the desired side of the relation. This information, as well as more features that can be added to class diagrams, can be found on this page of the official website: http://plantuml.com/class-diagram.

# use cases: details about why to use it
There are many reasons as to why having a UML diagram is helpful when creating software. It can help plan and describe what is happening in a concise form. Unlike other alternatives PlantUML supports many different types of diagrams, is free, and the language is very concise and easy to understand. This post has more words or lines than a program in PlanUML would. 

# alternatives: what other tools are equivalent, why did you choose this tool
It's always possible to draw diagrams by hand. However, this alternative is probably not the best choice for complex or long-term projects which change over time or are maintained by many people. Arnaud was inspired by how diagrams were created at https://www.websequencediagrams.com/, however, it is only for sequence diagrams and therefore not a suitable alternative either. MySQL Workbench is able to create diagrams, though it is a bit limited. If you don't want to write any code or create an account, https://www.draw.io/ may be an attractive alternative. It contains a UML section and allows users to drag and drop items onto a canvas as well as edit them. You can also use Scruffy at https://yuml.me/ to draw diagrams. I've never used this, but at first glance, it looks like the code is a bit more complex or not as intuitive as plantUML. 
